Blog: How we built our onboarding email flow (with actual performance data) (#7703)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/how-we-built-email-onboarding.md

We don’t do those sort of outreach emails. This is what we do instead, and how we got there over 5 major iterations. We think it works and we've included performance data so you can judge for yourself.

## Onboarding 1.0: The one where it started costing lots

Back in 2022, our onboarding flow was powered by Mailchimp and was _very_ simple. In fact, nobody actually knew what it looked like. So, I mapped it in [an RFC](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/issues/3202).

![Onboarding 1.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_1.png)
<Caption>The first map we did of what our email onboarding flow looked like</Caption>

We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this and imported 30,000+ users into that email list. The move was covered by our T&Cs and, because it was one email a month about actual product updates, we figured nobody would mind. The good news was that we were right and didn't get a single complaint and only a handful of unsubscribes.

> The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. This is because Mailchimp's pricing is based partly on how many emails you send each month, and it has low limits which makes it entirely unsuited for a complex onboarding campaign. We started searching for a platform with more predictable and scalable pricing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. This is because Mailchimp's pricing is based partly on how many emails you send each month, and it has low limits that make it entirely unsuited for a complex onboarding campaign. We started searching for a platform with more predictable and scalable pricing.
```

## Onboarding 2.0: The one where we chose a new email tool

> Towards the end of 2022, we finally moved off of Mailchimp. We looked at tools such as Braze, Hubspot, and Customer.io, ultimately choosing the latter because it had [more transparent pricing](/blog/transparent-enterprise-pricing) and we had an existing app for pushing data to it. Signing the deal was arduous – Customer.io wanted almost ten separate meetings before they took our money, for some reason, but at least they didn't send any awful sales outreach emails!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Towards the end of 2022, we finally moved off of Mailchimp. We looked at tools such as Braze, Hubspot, and Customer.io, ultimately choosing the latter because it had [more transparent pricing](/blog/transparent-enterprise-pricing) and we had an existing app for pushing data to it. Signing the deal was arduous – Customer.io wanted almost ten separate meetings before they took our money, but at least they didn't send any awful sales outreach emails!
```

One successful experiment we did roll out was adding more personalized emails for non-technical users. If `role_at_organization` = `marketing`, `sales` or `product` _and_ a user had not created an [action](/docs/data/actions) within 12 hours, I’d send them another personal tip. These emails averaged a steady 6% CTR and 54% open rate, so we kept them in, but interestingly I didn't see many replies on these messages.

## Onboarding 4.0: The one where we filtered by ICP

[4.0](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/pull/150/) was a massive step up in complexity as a result of our growing number of features. By late 2023 the flow had 28 separate emails, of which users would get a maximum of 6 over several weeks. We still worried this would be too many, but the low (0.4%) unsubscribe rate suggested otherwise.

![Onboarding 4.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_31.png)
<Caption>Onboarding 4.0 split high-ICP users out into their own email flow because our CS team would reach out directly</Caption>

> By this point we’d also changed our conversion event to mean a user enabling billing for a new product within one week of opening an email. 

Reviewer: Could we explain why we changed the conversion event + why we chose this one?

Author: I mean, it seems pretty obvious why we'd care about users turning into paying customers? But sure. 

```suggestion
By this point we’d also changed our conversion event to mean a user enabling billing for a product within one week of opening an email - a far better indicator of if the emails are delivering value than simply measuring logins. 
```

The goal of this flow is to focus on improving activation, and build on some parallel improvements to our in-app onboarding flow. Now when a user signs up to PostHog we ask them to select a product to setup first: analytics, replays, flags, or surveys. [Onboarding 5.0](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/172) builds off that selection by encouraging users to use that product, and then showing how other features can combine with it.

![Onboarding 5.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_31.png)
<Caption>Onboarding 5.0: Messy, complex, and highly personalized to user interests</Caption>

The hope was that this would improve in-app activation, which we roughly define as: 

**Product analytics:** Events ingested, 1 insight created, 1 dashboard created
**Session replay:** 5 recordings viewed
**Feature flags:** 1 feature flag created
**Surveys:** 1 survey launched

To avoid annoying users, we added a time block based on our activation criteria – if a user hasn’t activated after two emails, we stop sending them emails for six weeks. We also use an unsubscribe notice that tells users how many emails they can typically expect: one email per week, for six weeks. 

> ## What’s next?

Reviewer: I think you missed my comment about this, but could you add a section before "What's next?" that just summarizes what you learned through all these revisions. It just needs some takeaways for the reader to remember.

Author: ```suggestion
## What we learned

Across the five major versions (and many other smaller iterations) of our email onboarding, there are a few definite things we've learned. 

### Email works for engineers too
As I said at the start, the conventional wisdom is that engineers are particularly skeptical of any marketing activity, and likely to unsubscribe to emails. However, our unsubscribe rates have been consistently low enough to disprove this. If the emails add value for engineers and are [well-written for that audience](/founders/writing-for-developers), they can still be effective. 

### You can send more emails than you think
One of our consistent worries has been that we send too many emails. Again though, the low unsubscribe rate suggests that users aren't getting annoyed by this. The current email flow gives users approximately six emails, yet we've not heard any complaints about this. 

We think the reason for this is...

1. We space emails out quite conservatively. Users will typically only get one email per week, and we are defensive about deviating from this schedule. 
2. We tell users how many emails they'll get. It's added to the welcome email, right next to the unsubscribe button. This means users know we value their time and can unsubscribe _before_ they get annoyed. 
3. Our emails are actually worth reading. We don't send those awful outreach emails from sales reps, we don't run limited-time discounts, and we don't beg users to pay more. We just tell them how to get more out of PostHog. 

### Users prefer fun visual art to screenshots
I mean, who _wouldn't_ want to look at a cute hedgehog instead of a graph? 

We've run tests on this several times and [Lottie's](https://posthog.com/community/profiles/227) art is victorious by a small margin every time. 

### Personalization matters
Personalization doesn't mean calling users by their first name using a [liquid](https://customer.io/docs/journeys/using-liquid/) tag and pretending to be best buds. It means providing the right content, at the right time, in the right way. 

We do this in several ways in the latest version - delaying our welcome email, tailoring the emails users receive based on their choices, and sending newsletter invites from my personal address. If nothing else, the replies I frequently receive from users are a testament to how effective this is. 

## What’s next?
```

featuredImageType: full
---

Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be  difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 

Often, you end up getting awful sales rep outreach emails from them _months_ later too. That's important because it's probably the root cause for the conventional wisdom that developers do not respond well to email marketing. Turns out, they just don't respond well to _bad_ email marketing. 

We don’t do those sort of outreach emails. This is what we do instead. We think it works and we've included performance data so you can judge for yourself.

## Onboarding 1.0: The one where it started costing lots

Back in 2022 our onboarding flow was powered by Mailchimp and was very, _very_ simple. In fact, nobody actually knew what it looked like. So, I mapped it in [an RFC](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/issues/3202).

![Onboarding 1.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_1.png)
<caption>The first map we did of what our email onboarding flow looked like</caption>

> We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this, imported 30,000+ users into that email list (covered by our T&Cs), and sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. Whoops.

Author: ```suggestion
We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this and imported 30,000+ users into that email list. The move was covered by our T&Cs and, because it was one email a month about actual product updates, we figured nobody would mind. The good news was that we were right and didn't get a single complaint and only a handful of unsubscribes.

The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. 
```

---
date: 2024-02-05
title: "How we built our onboarding email flow (with actual performance data)"
rootPage: /blog
category: Inside PostHog
author: ["joe-martin"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/blog_onboarding.jpg
featuredImageType: full
---

> Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be  difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 

Author: ```suggestion
Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 
```

> Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 
> 
> Often, you end up getting awful sales rep outreach emails from them _months_ later too. That's important because it's probably the root cause for the conventional wisdom that developers do not respond well to email marketing. Turns out, they just don't respond well to _bad_ email marketing. 

Author: ```suggestion
Conventional wisdom among marketers is that onboarding emails are a powerful tool for driving engagement. Convention wisdom among everyone else is that they're terrible and ineffective.

As always, the conventional wisdom isn't entirely accurate - but it can be hard to tell because there's no way to know what a anyones onboarding emails look like without signing up and letting them flood your inbox. Often that means getting flooded with awful outreach emails from sales reps. 
```

Better?

> Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 
> 
> Often, you end up getting awful sales rep outreach emails from them _months_ later too. That's important because it's probably the root cause for the conventional wisdom that developers do not respond well to email marketing. Turns out, they just don't respond well to _bad_ email marketing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Marketers believe onboarding emails are a powerful tool for driving engagement. Everyone else thinks they're annoying and ineffective. The truth, as always, is a little more complicated.

People, and developers in particular, hate onboarding campaigns because the bad ones are so memorable. And how would you know what "good" looks like without signing up and risking a flood of tedious outreach emails from sales reps?
```

> Often, you end up getting awful sales rep outreach emails from them _months_ later too. That's important because it's probably the root cause for the conventional wisdom that developers do not respond well to email marketing. Turns out, they just don't respond well to _bad_ email marketing. 

Reviewer: Based on your suggestion, but tweaked a bit.

> We don’t do those sort of outreach emails. This is what we do instead. We think it works and we've included performance data so you can judge for yourself.

Author: ```suggestion
We don’t do those sort of outreach emails. This is what we do instead, and how we got there over 5 major iterations. We think it works and we've included performance data so you can judge for yourself.
```

## Onboarding 1.0: The one where it started costing lots

Back in 2022 our onboarding flow was powered by Mailchimp and was very, _very_ simple. In fact, nobody actually knew what it looked like. So, I mapped it in [an RFC](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/issues/3202).

![Onboarding 1.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_1.png)
<caption>The first map we did of what our email onboarding flow looked like</caption>

> We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this and imported 30,000+ users into that email list. The move was covered by our T&Cs and, because it was one email a month about actual product updates, we figured nobody would mind. The good news was that we were right and didn't get a single complaint and only a handful of unsubscribes.

Reviewer: ?? I just added a line break for readability

> We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this and imported 30,000+ users into that email list. The move was covered by our T&Cs and, because it was one email a month about actual product updates, we figured nobody would mind. The good news was that we were right and didn't get a single complaint and only a handful of unsubscribes.

Author: Ah, sorry! Misread the diff change and thought you'd deleted it! My bad

> The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. 

Author: ```suggestion
The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. This is because Mailchimp's pricing is based on how many emails you send each month, which makes it entirely unsuited for a complex onboarding campaign and left us searching for a platform with more predictable and scalable pricing.
```

> The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. This is because Mailchimp's pricing is based on how many emails you send each month, which makes it entirely unsuited for a complex onboarding campaign and left us searching for a platform with more predictable and scalable pricing.

Author: ```suggestion
The bad news is that it sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. This is because Mailchimp's pricing is based partly on how many emails you send each month, and it has low limits which makes it entirely unsuited for a complex onboarding campaign. We started searching for a platform with more predictable and scalable pricing.
```

## Onboarding 2.0: The one where we chose a new email tool

> Towards the end of 2022, we finally moved off of Mailchimp and on to Customer.io – a purchasing path which took several painful weeks and almost ten separate meetings. I don't know why Customer.io wanted so many meetings before they took our money, but at least they didn't send any awful sales outreach emails.

Author: ```suggestion
Towards the end of 2022, we finally moved off of Mailchimp. We looked at tools such as Braze, Hubspot, and Customer.io, ultimately choosing the latter because it had [more transparent pricing](/blog/transparent-enterprise-pricing) and we had an existing app for pushing data to it. Signing the deal was arduous – Customer.io wanted almost ten separate meetings before they took our money, for some reason, but at least they didn't send any awful sales outreach emails!
```

> I’d observed from other companies that we needed to at least a welcome email for new users, and I wanted to add checks after 24, 96, and 168 hours to see if users had ingested events. If yes, we’d send them some basic usage advice. If no, we’d offer them help. This was the very least I felt we could do. 

Author: ```suggestion
I’d observed from other companies that we needed to at least add a welcome email for new users, and I wanted to add checks after 24, 96, and 168 hours to see if users had ingested events. If yes, we’d send them some basic usage advice. If no, we’d offer them help. This was the very least I felt we could do. 
```

![Onboarding 2.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_2.png)
<caption>Onboarding 2.0 added more checks to try and validate ingestion and three simple introductory emails</caption>

This didn’t perform as well as you’d think, however, mainly because the ingestion checks were unreliable. Users kept complaining about getting the wrong emails, so we threw this all out and moved to a new plan.

> **Tip:** Something we learned for our welcome email was not to send it immediately after sign-up. The email is meant to give users initial direction, but first they need to set up ingestion – we added a one hour delay so that users can get data to work with first. 

## Onboarding 3.0: The one where we started tracking data

By Q3 2023, we were adding more and more new products to PostHog. We wanted to feature these in our flow, but we were also worried about becoming spammy. Thankfully, now that we had Customer.io in place, we were able to judge this based on the data. 

![Onboarding 3.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_3.png)
<caption>New emails for 3.0 tried to emphasize what was possible with PostHog, directing users to helpful blog content</caption>

> Here’s what the data looked like. Our conversion event was a user log-in within one week of opening an email. We hadn’t yet thought of anything better. 

Author: ```suggestion
Our conversion event was a user log-in within one week of opening an email. We hadn’t yet thought of anything better. 
```

- **Open rate:** 56%
- **Click-through-rate:** 7.4%
- **Conversion rate:** 3%
- **Unsubscribe rate:** 0.6%

Based on this high open rate and low unsubscribe rate we felt that users didn't mind getting the emails, and the click-through rate suggested they liked what they read. So, we continued adding more messages. 

> > What does good look like for an email onboarding flow?

Author: ```suggestion
> **What does good look like for an email onboarding flow?**
```

> - **Click-through-rate:** Anything above 4% is OK. 6% is the goal. 
> - **Conversion rate:** Anything above 3% is OK. 5% is the goal. 
> - **Unsubscribe rate:** Anything below 1% is OK. 0% is the goal.

## Onboarding 3.1: The one where we added personalization

Data is important, but I strongly believe it doesn’t tell the whole story. You also need feedback and intuition. Most of the feedback on our emails came in [3.1](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/127), when we started sending personalized recommendations to users from [my personal email](mailto:joe@posthog.com).

How this works is simple: when a user signs up, they can optionally tell us what their role is. If their `role_at_organization` = `engineer` we trigger an email from me telling them about [our Product for Engineers newsletter](https://newsletter.posthog.com/). 

![Onboarding 3.1](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_31.png)
<caption>Onboarding 3.1 was when we really started tailoring emails based on what we knew about users</caption>

This email performed very well, with a 68% open rate and a 16% CTR. Two emails into the flow and developers were already opting in to _more_ emails! 

> Best of all though, because it was personalized and came from me directly, it also earned a steady trickle of replies. I responded in kind and was able to collect feed in further improvements, including adding another option for `role_at_organization` = `founder`. 

Author: ```suggestion
Best of all though, because it was personalized and came from me directly, it also earned a steady trickle of replies. I responded in kind and was able to feed in further improvements, including adding another option for `role_at_organization` = `founder`. 
```

## Onboarding 3.3: The one where we added experiments

> In [3.3](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/140) we started running a series of tests and experiments. We added and then removed a `founder` targeted email, which invited teams to join [PostHog for Startups](/startups), because it was _too_ successful and cannibalised revenue.

Author: ```suggestion
In [3.3](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/140) we started running a series of tests and experiments. We  removed the `founder` targeted email, which invited teams to join [PostHog for Startups](/startups), because it was _too_ successful and cannibalised revenue.
```

Most of the tests we ran proved inconclusive, or outright failed. Subtle changes to subject lines or body copy had no noticeable impact. We learned that users did _slightly_ prefer [Lottie’s](https://posthog.com/community/profiles/227) hedgehog art over screenshots of the app – but the difference was a negligible 1-2% in CTR. 

One successful experiment we did roll out was adding more personalized emails for non-technical users. If `role_at_organization` = `marketing`, `sales` or `product` _and_ a user had not created an [action](/docs/data/actions) within 12 hours, I’d send them another personal tip. These emails averaged a steady 6% CTR and 54% open rate, so we kept them in, but interestingly I didn't see many replies on these messages.

## Onboarding 4.0: The one where we filtered by ICP

> [4.0](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/pull/150/) was a massive step up in complexity as a result of our growing number of features. By late 2023 the flow had 28 separate emails, of which users would get a maximum of 6 over several weeks. We still worried this would be too many, but the data suggests otherwise.

Author: ```suggestion
[4.0](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/pull/150/) was a massive step up in complexity as a result of our growing number of features. By late 2023 the flow had 28 separate emails, of which users would get a maximum of 6 over several weeks. We still worried this would be too many, but the low (0.4%) unsubscribe rate suggested otherwise.
```

![Onboarding 4.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_31.png)

> <caption>Onboarding 4.0 split high-ICP users out into their own email flow because our CS team would reach out directly</caption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Caption>Onboarding 4.0 split high-ICP users out into their own email flow because our CS team would reach out directly</Caption>
```

By this point we’d also changed our conversion event to mean a user enabling billing for a new product within one week of opening an email. 

> - **Open rate:** 52%
> - **Click-through-rate:** 4%
> - **Unsubscribe rate:** 0.4%
> - **Conversion rate:** 6%

Author: ```suggestion
- **Open rate:** 52%
- **Click-through-rate:** 4%
- **Conversion rate:** 6%
- **Unsubscribe rate:** 0.4%
```

> - **Conversion rate:** 6%

Author: What a conversion is is explained in the previous sentence. It's a different conversion event for this and the previous version, which is why they aren't directly comparable perhaps - but it's also incorrect data. The correct version is above.

The short version here is: 

- We added a lot more emails, so it was predictable open rate and CTR would go down slightly
- But we now had a better conversion event that tracked actual product subscriptions, and that looked good but not great
- The unsub rate was negligible change, but dipped in the new version

Based on this, we didn't roll-back and kept iterating.

Around this point we also started filtering out [ICP](/founders/creating-ideal-customer-profile) teams using a scoring system implemented in Hubspot. If a user scored over a certain threshold they’d be moved out of the usual flow so [our customer success team](/handbook/small-teams/customer-success) could reach out directly. We’ve since removed this check because it felt too salesy and didn’t perform well, however. 

## Onboarding 5.0

At the time of writing this is the current onboarding flow. It contains over 53 emails and 38 timed events and was, quite simply, a pain in the ass to explain to everyone internally.

The goal of this flow was to focus on improving activation, and build on some parallel improvements to our in-app onboarding flow. Now when a user signs up to PostHog we ask them to select a product to setup first: analytics, replays, flags, or surveys. [Onboarding 5.0](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/172) builds off that selection by encouraging users to use that product, and then showing how other features can combine with it.

![Onboarding 5.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_31.png)

> <caption>Onboarding 5.0: Messy, complex, and highly personalized to user interests</caption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Caption>Onboarding 5.0: Messy, complex, and highly personalized to user interests</Caption>
```

---

> date: 2024-02-05

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2024-02-19
```

featuredImageType: full
---

Email is a powerful tool for getting users to engage with your product, but it can be really difficult to know how the best companies structure their onboarding email flows. You end up having to sign up to a bunch of them, then waiting and letting your inbox get flooded. 

Often, you end up getting awful sales rep outreach emails from them _months_ later too. 

We don’t do those sort of outreach emails. This is what we do instead, and how the email onboarding has changed over the last five iterations. We think it performs pretty well and defies the idea that developers don't like email marketing - but we've included performance data so you can judge for yourself. 

## Onboarding 1.0: The one where it started costing lots

Back in 2022 our onboarding flow was powered by Mailchimp and was very, _very_ simple. In fact, nobody actually knew what it looked like. So, I mapped it in [an RFC](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/issues/3202).

![Onboarding 1.0](../images/blog/onboarding/onboarding_1.png)
<caption>The first map we did of what our email onboarding flow looked like</caption>

> We didn’t do welcome emails for new users, and even our monthly changelog emails were only sent to 660 opted-in users. I decided to change this, imported 30,000+ users into that email list, and sent our Mailchimp costs skyrocketing. Whoops.

Reviewer 2: This makes it slightly sound like you opted in 30k people against their will, when I don't think that's what actually happened?

Author: ...That is basically what happened. 

We reviewed our T&Cs to check we could, then we did. We were only using it for product update news so we figured nobody would complain. Nobody did.

Reviewer 2: Ah ok, gotcha - yeah what you've said here even would be worth including in some form

> We reviewed our T&Cs to check we could, then we did. We were only using it for product update news so we figured nobody would complain. Nobody did.
